FISH-7078: OpenTelemetry documentation (#209)
payara/Payara-Documentation: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/Technical Documentation/Payara Server Documentation/Logging and Monitoring/Request Tracing Service/OpenTelemetry and OpenTracing.adoc

[[opentelemetry-and-opentracing]]
= OpenTelemetry and OpenTracing support

Payara Server and Payara Micro natively support OpenTelemetry APIs as well as export of traces over OTLP protocol.

> Natively in the context means, that deployment of OpenTelemetry Agent is not necessary and may lead to duplicate traces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Natively in this context means, that deployment of an OpenTelemetry Agent is not necessary and may lead to duplicate traces.
```

> All of OpenTracing support in Payara products is done by means of https://opentelemetry.io/docs/migration/opentracing[OpenTracing Compatibility Layer].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All OpenTracing support in Payara products is done by means of https://opentelemetry.io/docs/migration/opentracing[OpenTracing Compatibility Layer].
```

Payara Server and Payara Micro satisfy requirements of both link:{mpOpenTracingSpecUrl}[MicroProfile OpenTracing {mpOpenTracingVersion}] and link:{mpTelemetrySpecUrl}[MicroProfile Telemetry Tracing {mpTelemetryVersion}] provided appropriate <<span-convention-settings>> are applied.

> Implementation only covers tracing aspect of OpenTelemetry, no metrics or logs are provided by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementation only covers the tracing aspect of OpenTelemetry, no metrics or logs are provided by default.
```

Manual instrumentation is needed to enable these.

== Enabling OpenTelemetry

> OpenTelemetry is enabled for particular application when:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry is enabled for a particular application when:
```

* `/resource` is `@Path` annotation of class `example.Resource`
* `/method` is `@Path` annotation of method `restMethod`

Following span names will be created for this request for different Span Convention settings:

|===
| span-convention setting| Server Span Name

| `opentelemetry` | `GET /app/rest/resource/method`
| `opentracing-class-method` | `GET:example.Resource.restMethod` 
| `opentracing-http-path` | `GET:/resource/method`
| `microprofile-telemetry` | `/app/rest/resource/method`
|===

=== Suppressing Export Warning Message

When export endpoint is not available in default setting following error message is logged by logger `io.opentelemetry.exported.internal.grpc.OkHttpGrpcExporter`:

> Failed to export spans. The request could not be executed. Full error message: Failed to connect to `localhost/127.0.0.1:4317`

If you don't intend to run OTEL endpoint on localhost or at all you need to configure exporter by means of MP Config Properties, system properties or environment variables:

* in order to turn off exports set `otel.traces.exporter` to `none`
* in order to set remote endpoint `otel.exporter.otlp.endpoint` to `http://<collector-host>:<port>`

== Manual tracing

> In order to fine-tune spans and have better control about their boundaries one can use directly either OpenTracing on OpenTelemetry APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to fine-tune spans and have better control about their boundaries one can use directly either the OpenTracing or OpenTelemetry APIs.
```

=== Dependencies

The appropriate versions of APIs are provided by xref:/Technical Documentation/Ecosystem/Project Management Tools/Maven Bom.adoc[Payara BOM artifact] matching the version of Payara Server or Micro you are using.

> Server provides following APIs and it is advised to mark them as `provided` dependencies in your application and don't package them with it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Payara Platform provides the following APIs and it is advised to mark them as `provided` dependencies in your application and don't package them with it:
```

* `io.opentelemetry:opentelemetry-exporter-common`

=== Using OpenTelemetry Manually
[source,java]
----
import io.opentelemetry.api.trace.Tracer;

@RequestScoped
public class TracedComponent {

    @Inject
    Tracer tracer;

    public void tracedMethod() {
        var span = tracer.spanBuilder("tracedTask").startSpan();

        try (var scope = span.makeCurrent()) {
            // do work, add information to span

            if (span.isRecording()) {
                // compute expensive events or tags
                // only if the span is being sampled
            }
        } finally {
            span.setStatus(StatusCode.OK);
            span.end();        
        }
    }
}
----

=== Using OpenTracing Manually
[source,java]
----
import io.opentracing.Tracer;

@RequestScoped
public class TracedComponent {

    @Inject
    Tracer tracer;

    public void tracedMethod() {
        var span = tracer.buildSpan("tracedTask").start();

        try (var scope = tracer.activateSpan(span)) {
            // do work, add information to span
        } finally {
            span.finish();        
        }
    }
}
----

[[using-additional-components]]
== Using additional components

> If your application requires OpenTracing components that are not shipped with server, it is possible to either put them in common libraries, or ship them with an application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your application requires OpenTracing components that are not shipped with Payara Platform, it is possible to either put them in common libraries, or ship them with an application.
```

[source]
----
example.LogExporter.Provider
----

.src/main/java/example/LogExporter.java
[source,java]
----
public class LogExporter implements SpanExporter {

    private static final Logger LOGGER = Logger.getLogger(LogExporter.class.getName());

    @Override
    public CompletableResultCode export(Collection<SpanData> spans) {
        spans.forEach(s -> LOGGER.info(s.toString()));
        return CompletableResultCode.ofSuccess();
    }

    @Override
    public CompletableResultCode flush() {
        return CompletableResultCode.ofSuccess();
    }

    @Override
    public CompletableResultCode shutdown() {
        return CompletableResultCode.ofSuccess();
    }

    // This is registered as SPI and creates configured exporter
    public static class Provider implements ConfigurableSpanExporterProvider {

        @Override
        public SpanExporter createExporter(ConfigProperties configProperties) {
            return new LogExporter();
        }

        @Override
        public String getName() {
            return "logs";
        }
    }
}
----

== Relation to Request Tracing Service

> All spans created by OpenTelemetry and OpenTracing APIs are passed into Request Tracing Service when span ends.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All spans created by OpenTelemetry and OpenTracing APIs are passed into Request Tracing Service when they end.
```

> Propagated trace IDs are propagated into Request Tracing Service at start of span.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Propagated trace IDs are propagated into Request Tracing Service at the start of spans.
```

Sampling decisions of Request Tracing service are _not_ taken into account when these traces are created, because Request Tracing Service does tracing decision at the end of span rather than at the beginning.

> This means that trace might get exported via OTLP but not passed to notifiers configured in Request Tracing Service, because the service might have taken decision not to sample this particular trace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that traces might get exported via OTLP but not passed to the notifiers configured in the Request Tracing Service, because the service might have taken the decision not to sample this particular trace.
```
